NeuroViG - Integrating Event Cameras for Resource-Efficient Video Grounding
Dulanga Weerakoon
SMART Centre
dulanga.weerakoon@smart.mit.edu
Vigneshwaran Subbaraju
A*STAR, Singapore
Vigneshwaran Subbaraju@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg
Joo Hwee Lim
A*STAR, Singapore
joohwee@i2r.a-star.edu.sg
Archan Misra
Singapore Management University
archanm@smu.edu.sg
Abstract
Spatio-Temporal Video Grounding (STVG) – the task of
identifying the target object in the field-of-view, that the
language instruction refers to – is a fundamental vision-
language task. Current STVG approaches typically utilize
feeds from an RGB camera that is assumed to be always-
on and process the video frames using complex neural net-
work pipelines. As a result, they often impose prohibitive
system overheads (energy, latency) on pervasive devices.
To address this, we propose NeuroViG with two key in-
novations: (a) leveraging on event streams from a low-
power neuromorphic event camera sensor to perform se-
lective triggering of the more energy-hungry RGB cam-
era for STVG, and (b) augmenting the STVG model with
a lightweight Adaptive Frame Selector (AFS) that bypasses
complex transformer-based operations for a majority of
video frames, thereby enabling its execution on a pervasive
Jetson AGX device. We have also introduced modifications
to the neural network processing pipeline such that the sys-
tem can offer tunable tradeoffs between accuracy and en-
ergy/latency. Our proposed NeuroViG system allows us to
reduce the STVG energy overhead and latency by∼ 4x and
∼ 3.8x, respectively, for less than 1% loss in accuracy.
1. Introduction
Spatio-Temporal Video Grounding (STVG) is a com-
pound vision-language task that combines both spatial and
temporal grounding of a natural language query over a
video. In STVG, a given video feed and a natural lan-
guage query are taken as input to identify (a) the target
object/region-of-interest, and (b) the start and end of the
temporal segment within which this object is visible. Thus,
the output of this multi-modal task is often visualized as a
spatio-temporal tube extracted from the video by identify-
ing the bounding-box of the target object over several con-
secutive frames of the relevant video segment.
STVG requires both temporal and spatial reasoning over
multiple video frames. Implementing STVG on resource-
constrained devices is thus very challenging due to high
overheads involved in both sensing and processing. Single-
stage transformer based models such as TubeDETR [24]
and STCAT [9] dominate the performance charts in this
challenging vision-language task. However, these state-of-
the-art STVG models are very computationally intensive as
they require cross-modal attention mechanisms to be re-
peated across several frames of a video. Typically, they
load entire videos and execute the compute-heavy trans-
former encoders onevery single frameto retain the resulting
intermediate feature maps. Subsequently, the intermediate
attention-based features obtained from the decoder are used
by prediction heads to generate the following three outputs
for every single video frame— (a) a bounding box, (b) a
probability that this frame is the start-frame of a tube and
(c) the probability that this frame is the end-frame of a tube.
Our evaluation of TubeDETR [24] and STCAT [9] (see Fig-
ure 7) reveals that processing latency steadily increases with
the video length. It is thus crucial to reduce the computa-
tional latency and energy of STVG models, especially for
practical use-cases that (a) involve long untrimmed videos
(e.g., security footage or instructional videos), or (b) weave
such grounding into interactive applications (e.g., having
service bots respond to human assistance requests). Besides
the processing overhead, traditional STVG models also re-
quire continuous input from an RGB camera, which unnec-
essarily increases the sensing energy overhead. Thus, it is
necessary to reduce both processing and sensing overheads.
In this paper, we propose NeuroViG - a system that can
support the on-device execution of an STVG task on a per-
vasive device, with significantly lower processing and sens-
ing overheads. Our key insight is that it is often sufficient
to execute the STVG pipeline on a small set of candidate
moments/frames within a given video (e.g., when we see
a frame that contains relevant objects or gestures men-
This WACV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.
5781
\ntioned in the accompanying text) . Therefore, instead of
continuously capturing images with the RGB camera, we
use an event camera such as the Dynamic Vision Sensor
(DVS) [12] to trigger the RGB camera only when required.
In contrast to RGB cameras which rely on successive im-
age frames to capture the dynamics of a scene, event cam-
eras can directly capture scene dynamics. Hence, using an
event camera for grounding enables the direct extraction
of motion-specific representations from the sensor’s out-
put, eliminating the need for further processing of RGB fea-
tures. They also have advantages such as – a) low latency
(in microseconds), and b) low power consumption (0.31W
in comparison to 1.1W in traditional cameras). However,
completely replacing the traditional RGB camera with an
event camera is not feasible, as they may not capture static
components of a scene or attributes such as color. Fur-
thermore, current computer vision pipelines are tailored for
sense-making using traditional RGB camera input and not
an event-camera stream. Hence, we opt for an opportunistic
triggering based mechanism that harnesses the advantages
of both an event camera and the RGB-based SOTA models
for STVG. In this approach, the RGB camera helps cap-
ture static scene components and key moments in a video,
whereas an event camera provides a low power approxima-
tion of the redundant frames.
To support selective triggering of the RGB camera, we
have developed a lightweight early estimator named Adap-
tive Frame Selector (AFS) which takes the event-camera
stream and the textual query as an input to predict the
key moments known as anchor-frames within the video.
The RGB camera is triggered upon detection of such an-
chor frames. Further, we propose a lightweight STVG
model, called NeuroViG, which combines AFS along with
the transformer encoder-decoder used by SOTA models for
STVG. NeuroViG saves significant processing overheads
by executing the complex transformer encoder-decoder
pipelines exclusively on the anchor frames predicted by
AFS. For the non-anchor frames, AFS provides a feature
representation (called delta features) of the visual changes
between the current frame and the last identified anchor
frame. These delta features can then used to generate an
approximation of the attention-based features for each non-
anchor frame. The following are our main contributions:
• NeuroViG : We believe that NeuroViG is the first sys-
tem to execute the STVG task on a pervasive device (Jet-
son AGX device), running at 8.2 FPS while consuming
a total energy of 1.18J per frame. This makes NeuroViG
∼ 3.82x faster and 4.08x energy efficient than STCAT,
while maintaining similar accuracy.
• Event camera based Adaptive Frame Selector : We
have developed a novel Adaptive Frame Selector to iden-
tify critical moments within the video that are pivotal
for accurately grounding the natural language instruction.
Our modified loss function for the AFS enables us to
choose between various levels of aggressive or conser-
vative frame-skipping behaviour in the STVG model to
exploit the trade-off between accuracy and overall energy
consumption (sensing + processing).
2. Related Work
Grounding is a foundational task in vision-language un-
derstanding, wherein the agent’s goal is to identify elements
within a video or image that correspond to a given linguis-
tic expression. Early approaches in this domain [14, 16, 26]
sought to leverage the success of pre-trained deep learning
models for object detection and natural language processing
to perform object grounding in images. Recent advance-
ments in this research area have focused on enhancing ef-
ficiency [25, 30] and extending the task to encompass ad-
ditional modalities, such as incorporating pointing gestures
alongside verbal instructions [6, 22]. Zhang et al. [27] in-
troduced the VidSTG dataset and the STGRN model [27],
which employs a two-stage Deep Neural Network (DNN)
pipeline to spatially and temporally locate objects. This
method relies on region or tubelet proposals generated in
the first stage, which are then used in the subsequent stage to
find the best match with the provided linguistic expression.
Transformer-based models also gained traction, including
STVGBert [18], an extension of ViLBERT that preserves
spatial information. STGVT [19] focuses on human-centric
STVG with the HC-STVG dataset.
More recently, single-stage STVG approaches have be-
come prominent, offering superior performance compared
to earlier two-stage methods. TubeDETR [24], for exam-
ple, extends MDETR [10] by incorporating temporal lo-
calization losses, slow-fast encoding, and space-time de-
coding. Another recent single-stage model for STVG is
STCAT [9], which employs an MDETR-based framework
and achieves state-of-the-art performance on both VidSTG
and HC-STVG datasets. In contrast to TubeDETR, STCAT
takes into account the global video context and maintains a
template mechanism in the query-guided decoder to explic-
itly model consistency.
With the introduction of neuromorphic event cameras,
many vision-based applications that traditionally relied
on RGB cameras are beginning to adopt event camera
streams as inputs. Event cameras offer several advan-
tages over frame-based counterparts, including exception-
ally fine temporal resolution (on the order of µsecs), a
wide dynamic range, and low power consumption. Due
to their asynchronous nature, numerous efforts have been
made to process event-based input using spiking neural net-
works (SNNs) [20]. Prior to integrating event streams into
processing pipelines for various vision-based applications,
such raw event data can be transformed into: a) Frame-
5782
\nbased representations [32], b) Time-surface representations
[17], or c) V oxel-based methods [15]. Recent advances in
leveraging event cameras for sense-making have also ex-
tended to the fusion of RGB and event camera streams. For
instance, Zhou et al. [31] proposed a frame-based multi-
modal DNN pipeline that simultaneously processes both a
conventional RGB camera stream and an event stream for
tasks like moving object detection.
In line with these developments, our NeuroViG frame-
work is built upon a frame-based representation for pro-
cessing event streams and represents the first approach to
present a DNN pipeline that integrates three distinct sensing
modalities: RGB camera data, event camera data, and nat-
ural language text instructions. Remarkably, our NeuroViG
system stands out as the first to use event camera streams for
STVG instead of just using traditional RGB inputs. This in-
novative approach not only reduces sensing and processing
energy overhead but also significantly improves latency.
3. Baseline
We consider several state-of-the-art STVG models as
baselines. All of the existing models proposed for STVG
use inputs from a traditional RGB camera, along with lan-
guage instruction. We identified STCAT [9] and Tube-
DETR [24] as the current state-of-the-art STVG mod-
els. Both of them use single-stage architectures with a)
ROBERTa [13] model for language encoding, b) ResNet-
101 model as visual feature backbone, c) Transformer en-
coder for calculating multi-modal video-text features, d)
Transformer decoder for modelling temporal dependencies
and e) 2 prediction heads for calculating spatio-temporal
bounding box tubes. Despite their single-stage architec-
tures, these networks are generally computationally inten-
sive due to the following reasons.
1. These approaches consist of a complex ResNet-101
[7] visual backbone, as well as multiple transformer
encoder-decoder blocks for modelling multi-modal
(video + text) features and temporal dependencies.
2. These networks demand all the frames of the input video
(partially or fully) to pass through a resource-intensive
pipeline involving multiple transformer blocks. Tube-
DETR [24] identified that this is very computationally
intensive and used a fast-slow two-stream approach in
their encoder that samples the video uniformly such
that only one out of every k frames (k is an ad hoc
constant) passes through the transformer encoder (slow
multi-modal stream) to extract the attention-based fea-
tures. However, TubeDETR still demands all the frames
to pass through a complex RESNET backbone and a
transformer decoder. On the other hand, STCAT, which
achieves higher accuracy, demands all of the frames
to pass through its complete pipeline including the en-
coder and decoder. Such computation imposes an av-
erage latency of 390msec per image and memory of
2.1GB for TubeDETR, and 450msec latency per image
and memory of 2.8GB STCAT, for VidSTG dataset on
an NVIDIA Jetson AGX device [3].
3. None of the existing work has looked at reducing the
sensing overhead. Both STCAT and TubeDETR (and all
of the existing work), require the camera to be always
turned on. This will not be suitable, particularly in a
pervasive setting where the sensing is performed by a
battery-operated wearable or embedded device.
To overcome these limitations, we looked into suitable
approaches for jointly reducing the computational and sens-
ing load involved in spatiotemporal video grounding. While
approaches like model pruning and skipping [21] have been
studied for unimodal tasks, they are less suited for DNNs
used in multi-modal tasks such as STVG. Some previous
works such as SoftSkip [23] and COSM2IC [22], have high-
lighted this problem and have come up with specialized ap-
proaches for multi-modal tasks such as referring expression
comprehension. Even so, such optimization has not been
attempted for transformer-based architectures that are com-
mon in STVG or for reducing sensing overhead. However,
we observed that: (a) the main computational load arises
from the need for all the frames to pass through the whole
pipeline, and (b) the main sensing overhead comes from
having to keep a traditional RGB camera always turned on.
We develop our NeuroViG to address these drawbacks.
4. NeuroViG System
We now describe the design of our proposed NeuroViG
system. We propose a hybrid sensing system, consisting of
both an event camera and an intermittently triggered RGB
camera. Our key idea is to use the RGB sensing stream for
some key moments in the video which we termed asanchor
frames. These anchor frames may represent frames which
either will not be captured well through an event camera
(static scenes which may generate few events) or where rel-
evant objects or actions first manifest or disappear. We fur-
ther identified that such adaptive sensing can be extended
to the processing pipeline. More precisely, we execute the
compute-heavy transformer encoder-decoder blocks only
on frames associated with such anchor moments.
However, we need to tackle two main challenges with
this proposed approach. First, the identification of such an-
chor frames should be computationally inexpensive, while
still utilizing features from both event stream and language
inputs. Second, even if we can determine such anchor mo-
ments (frames), data from an event camera and a traditional
camera use two different representations. Hence, we need to
devise a unified single-stage STVG model architecture that
5783
\nFigure 1. Overall architecture of STVG pipeline of NeuroViG
Figure 2. Architecture of Adaptive Frame Selector
accommodates both data representations. Inherently, out-
put from an event camera represents scene changes across
frames. Thus, we assume that the processing block from
the event camera represents a differential feature represen-
tation capturing scene changes with respect to the previous
frame and the last identified anchor frame. A full-blown
STVG pipeline is only executed over the identified anchor
frames, while the rest of the redundant frames are approxi-
mated with this computed delta representation. To identify
these anchor frames and delta feature representations, we
propose the Adaptive Frame Selector (AFS).
4.1. Adaptive Frame Selector
As shown in Figure 2, AFS takes a series of event frames
and language features as input. The raw output of the event
camera (Prophesee V2 [4] in our prototype implementation)
is described by a stream of{x,y,p,t } wherep∈{ 0, 1} de-
scribes the polarity of the event in either negative or positive
direction. We convert this stream-based event representa-
tion into a frame representation of shape [1× 448× 448].
This is achieved by aggregating all the events received in
a time frame of 33ms resulting in a fixed 30 FPS event
stream that is input to the AFS model. This frame repre-
sentation is passed through a shufflenet network for visual
encoding and converted to a 2-dimensional feature vector
of sizeRT×D, using a fully connected layer of output di-
mension ofD = 256. These feature vectors are then passed
through a window-based local attention network [5] (win-
dow size=10) to model the temporal dependencies in the lo-
cal neighbourhood to obtain Vt∈R T×D. Each visual fea-
tureVt is concatenated with the language features computed
using a ROBERTa model. Finally, AFS uses 2 separate in-
expensive Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) models (designed
to ensure low-latency processing) with 3 layers and dropout
for regularization (dropout probability=0.5). One of these
MLPs is used to predict whether a given frame is an anchor-
frame or not. The other MLP is used to obtain a feature
representation of the visual differences between the current
frame with respect to the nearest anchor-frame. We call
this output the delta feature representation. These delta fea-
tures will then be used to interpolate the encoder output to
obtain cross-modal attention-based features for non-anchor
frames, so that they can used by the decoder and the predic-
tion heads of the STVG pipeline to predict the spatiotempo-
ral tubes. The two MLPs can be expressed as below.
weights =Gumbel(MLP [Fl,E f
t ])
where weights∈R T×2
δH s =MLP [Fl,E f
t ] where δH s∈R T×D
(1)
In the above equation, Fl refers to the language fea-
tures taken from the same text encoder as STCAT, Ef
t
refers to the visual features obtained after computing lo-
cal attention for an event stream in frame representation
of length T frames, while weights determine whether the
respective frame is an anchor-frame or a redundant-frame.
We use Gumbel-Softmax activation function, which returns
discrete 0 or 1 value for elements in weights. When
weightsi[0] = 1 and weightsi[1] = 0 , i th frame is
deemed to be a anchor-frame. When weightsi[0] = 0 and
weightsi[1] = 1 , i th frame is deemed to be a redundant-
frame. We also assume that the first frame of the video is
always an anchor-frame (Thus, RGB camera is always ac-
tivated at the start once). The output of the second MLP,
denoted byδH s, represents the delta features.
4.2. Loss Function
We propose a modification to the original loss func-
tion used in STVG models to reward the model for skip-
ping more RGB frames. At the training stage, we define a
frame-skip parameter which is a hyper-parameter that de-
termines the percentage of RGB frames that are considered
to be redundant in the video. A value closer to 1 would
encourage aggressive skipping behaviour, thereby reducing
computation and also reducing RGB sensing overhead. A
value closer to 0 would encourage conservative skipping be-
haviour, resulting in higher computational load and sensing
overhead. Let this frame-skip parameter be denoted as S
and the original loss function of VG beLV G. We formulate
the following reward loss in our proposedNeuroViGsystem.
L =LV G+λdIoULdIoU (ˆb,b )+λw
N
NX
i=0
|weights[0]i−(1−S)|
(2)
Let us assume thatts andte are the ground truth start and
end times of the target object. Then, b∈ [0, 1]4×(te−ts+1)
and ˆb∈ [0, 1]4×(te−ts+1) denote the ground truth and pre-
dicted bounding box coordinates respectively for the du-
ration where the target object appears. In addition to the
original STVG loss function, the second and third terms in
5784
\nthe loss function act as our reward function. The second
term rewards the model for correct bounding box predic-
tion using Distance IoU metric [28]. The third term, which
is a Mean Absolute Error term rewards the model for skip-
ping a desired fraction of RGB frames as redundant frames.
SinceS refers to the desired average fraction of frames to
be skipped, 1−S refers to the desired average fraction of
anchor frames to be identified.λdIoU andλw are two hyper-
parameters set for specifying the relative weights for the re-
spective loss terms. These hyper-parameters are set to 1.0
and 2.0 respectively in the training stage.
Figures 1 summarizes this skipping paradigm used in
NeuroViG, applied to a typical encoder & decoder based
STVG pipeline that we shall now describe. The core prin-
ciple is to activate the traditional RGB camera only for the
anchor-frames and send them through an expensive STVG
pipeline, while the input from an event camera is utilized,
together with a late interpolation approach (explained in
Equation 3), to obtain the corresponding feature represen-
tation for the redundant frames.
4.3. NeuroViG STVG pipeline
We employ the AFS framework to introduce an opti-
mized STVG model within theNeuroViGsystem, which is a
derivative of STCAT. Figure 1 depicts the STVG model ar-
chitecture. Distinguishing itself from existing STVG meth-
ods, NeuroViGstands out as the first STVG model to accept
both event and RGB streams as inputs. This unique feature
empowers efficient and rapid processing, even on pervasive
devices. The NeuroViG model consists of several key com-
ponents, in addition to the previously explained AFS.
• Language Encoder: NeuroViG uses ROBERTa [13] as
the language encoder. The last hidden state output of
ROBERTa is followed by a Linear layer to obtain Fl∈
RL×d language features where L is the word length and
d = 256 is the hidden dimension. These language fea-
tures have already been computed for the AFS stage and
can thus simply be reused here.
• Visual & Multi-modal Encoder: After the AFS step,
we get a series of K anchor-frames,{It}K
t=1. These K
frames are passed to the ResNet101 [7] backbone to ob-
tain Fv ∈ RK×HW×d, where H and W are the res-
olution of the feature maps from the ResNet backbone.
Each{fv}M
i=1 is concatenated withFl to obtain the multi-
modal feature representation, which is then passed to 2
transformer encoders with 6 layers (similar to STCAT)
comprising the spatial interaction and temporal interac-
tion layers. The key idea in the spatial interaction layer is
to model spatial relationships in individual frames of the
video, whereas the temporal interaction layer models the
temporal dependencies across the video.
• Redundant Frame Interpolation: As mentioned ear-
lier, we always assume that the first frame of a video is an
anchor-frame. While an anchor frame is passed through a
complex ResNet visual backbone and an encoder pair to
obtain attention based features, the subsequent redundant
frames by-pass this complex ResNet based visual encoder
and the transformer-based encoder network. In order to
obtain the attention based features for such redundant
frames, we adopt an interpolation based approach. First,
to match the original sequence length of T video frames,
we temporally replicate H s
i till the next (i + 1)th anchor
frame is found. We repeat this fori = 0 toi =K− 1 till
we match the same sequence length of T . Then, for each
of the temporally replicated frameH s, we add (as shown
in Equation 3) the corresponding delta features δH s cal-
culated during the AFS step to obtain ˆH s.
ˆH s =H s +weights[1]∗δH s (3)
Intuitively, each of these interpolated frames approxi-
mates the attention based features of the corresponding
redundant frame by combining the attention based fea-
tures of the previous anchor-frame with the delta fea-
tures that represent the visual differences of the redundant
frame with respect to the anchor frame.
• Multi-modal Decoder: After redundant frame inter-
polation, STCAT proposes a query-guided decoding net-
work, with dual-decoder architecture, to model the tem-
poral interactions among a set of video-text features. We
adopt this dual-decoder network as the multi-modal de-
coder which takes the output from the visual & multi-
modal encoder. Multi-modal decoder outputs a feature
representationH D∈R K×d.
• Prediction Heads: We use two MLPs as prediction
heads that take H D as an input: (a) a 3-layer MLP for
predicting bounding box coordinates, ˆb∈ [0, 1]T×4 and
(b) a 2-layer MLP for predicting start and end time prob-
abilities ˆTs∈ [0, 1]T and ˆTe∈ [0, 1]T . During inference,
the start and end times of the target object ˆts and ˆte are
computed by finding the maximum of joint start and end
time probabilities, with invalid combinations (i.e., tuples
where ˆts≥ ˆte) masked out.
NeuroViG is trained for a single epoch with the initial
weights taken from the trained STCAT model and the
loss function as explained in Equation 2, where LV G is
replaced with the original loss function of STCAT and
frame-skip parameterS is set to 0.7.
4.4. NeuroViG System Implementation
Figure 3 shows our proposed system. We use Prophe-
see V2 [4] as the event camera and Kinect DK [1] as RGB
camera and microphone. Both these devices are connected
5785
\nFigure 3. NeuroViG System Architecture
to a Jetson Xavier AGX device [3], which executes both the
AFS preprocessing component and the rest of the STVG
pipeline. Both these devices are not officially supported for
integrating with ARM-based devices. Thus, for Prophesee
V2, we use their open-sourced SDK, OpenEB, instead of
the official MetaVision SDK. For the Kinect DK, we use a
cross-compiled version of their SDK for the ARM-based
devices. AFS and the rest of the STVG pipeline is im-
plemented using PyTorch. The microphone of the Kinect
DK remains continuously active, and we employ a real-
time speech-to-text engine [2], running on the AGX device,
to convert speech into textual commands. The NeuroViG
system is initiated upon the user’s command, typically with
the phrase ‘start’, and is subsequently terminated upon re-
ceiving the user’s ‘done’ command. This action triggers
the activation of the event camera. We assume the initial
frame is always designated as an anchor-frame, leading to
the activation of the RGB camera for a single frame along-
side the event camera. AFS then takes the output from the
event camera and textual query and sends a trigger signal
to the Kinect DK camera once it infers an anchor moment
in the video. Such intermittent triggering is also associated
with a startup delay of 120ms. However, as current STVG
pipelines are usually executed at 5 FPS, we can safely as-
sume that the startup delay of 120ms is tolerable and allows
STVG to be executed at 5 FPS without missing frames.
5. Results
We now experimentally evaluate NeuroViG vs. alterna-
tive state-of-the-art VG models. In general, we follow the
same evaluation methods utilized in prior work [9, 24]. In
addition to the standard metrics, we shall also consider la-
tency, frames per second (FPS), sensing energy, processing
and memory consumption as additional systems-level per-
formance metrics on a Jetson AGX device.
5.1. Datasets & Evaluation Metrics
Datasets: We utilize the VidSTG [27] and HC-STVG
[19] benchmark datasets that have also been used in prior
work for STVG evaluation. Both datasets are annotated
with spatiotemporal tubes with start and end frames, as
well as bounding boxes for each frame, corresponding to
text queries. VidSTG consists of 99,943 sentence descrip-
tions with 44,808 declarative sentences and 55,135 inter-
rogative sentences describing 79 types of objects appearing
in 10,303 different videos. HC-STVG is a human-centric
STVG dataset with 5,660 videos in multi-person scenes,
each associated with one language expression that is related
to human attributes or actions. All of the existing STVG
datasets are traditional video-based. To obtain the event-
based counterpart, we use a V2E simulator [8], which syn-
thesizes realistic event camera data from any real (or syn-
thetic) conventional frame-based video. Thus, we use V2E
to convert the existing videos in VidSTG and HC-STVG to
the event representation.
Evaluation Metrics: We follow [27] and use m vIoU ,
m tIoU and vIoU @R as accuracy metrics. v IoU =
1
|Su|
P
t∈SiIoU ( ˆbt,b t), whereSu andSi refer to the inter-
section and union between the predicted tube and ground
truth tube. IoU ( ˆbt,b t) refers to the IoU score between
the predicted bounding box and target bounding box at the
frame t. Thus, m vIoU refers to the mean vIoU score
across the dataset and vIoU @R refers to the percentage
number of predictions achieving avIoU score of at leastR.
tIoU measures the temporal overlap between the predicted
and ground truth tubes, defined as tIoU = |Si|
|Su|. m tIoU
then refers to the mean tIoU across the dataset. We also
measure the system-level metrics (inference latency, en-
ergy) on the Jetson AGX, which serves as the representative
edge device in our NeuroViG prototype.
5.2. Characterizing NeuroViG Performance with
Frame-Skip Parameter
During the training process of our proposed AFS and
NeuroViG, we introduced a reward loss mechanism to in-
centivize the model to skip traditional RGB frames, aiming
to reduce sensing and processing overhead. In this study,
we assess the performance of the NeuroViG system while
varying the frame-skip parameter. Our goal is to explore
the balance between accuracy and energy efficiency.
Initial measurements indicated that the Prophesee V2
and Kinect DK cameras draw an average power of 0.31W
and 1.125W, respectively. It was evident that utilizing an
event camera should ideally reduce sensing power con-
sumption by approximately 4 times.
To evaluate this, we first examined how the accuracy
of the NeuroViG model on the VidSTG dataset fluctuates
with different frame-skip parameters, as illustrated in Fig-
ure 4. Subsequently, we assessed how the sensing energy
per frame varies with the frame-skip parameter, as shown
in Figure 5. However, it’s important to note that sensing
energy is just one component contributing to the overall en-
ergy overhead of the NeuroViG system.
We also evaluated the processing energy overhead of the
system for different values of the frame-skip parameter, as
presented in Figure 6. Our findings indicate that increasing
the frame-skip parameter reduces both sensing and process-
ing energy overhead but comes at the cost of lower accu-
5786
\nracy. Conversely, setting the frame-skip parameter below
0.3 results in higher sensing energy consumption compared
to a baseline system using only a traditional RGB camera.
Based on this comprehensive study, we opted to select a
frame-skip parameter of 0.7. This choice strikes a balance
between energy efficiency and accuracy, aligning with our
goal to optimize the energy-accuracy trade-off
5.3. Performance on Benchmark Datasets
Tables 1 and 2 then summarize the performance of
NeuroViG (with frame-skip=0.7) against benchmark STVG
models on VidSTG and HC-STVG datasets respectively.
From our experiments, we observe that the AFS mecha-
nism allows NeuroViG to identify only∼35% of the video
frames as anchor frames, enabling the remaining frames to
bypass the encoder-decoder blocks. However, this results in
a minor drop in their accuracy when compared to STCAT.
The m vIoU of NeuroViG is just 1.08% shy of STCAT on
the human-centric HC-STVG dataset. On VidSTG dataset,
NeuroViG achieves an m vIoU that is just about 1.1% short
of STCAT for the interrogative sentences and about 0.99%
short of STCAT for the declarative sentences. When com-
pared to the TubeDETR,NeuroViGis able to achieve higher
m vIoU on all the benchmark tasks and also achieve multi-
fold improvement in grounding speed. Overall, we believe
that this drop in accuracy is tolerable in light of the fact
that nearly 65% of the frames by-passed the RESNET back-
bone and transformer encoder, and were approximated via
an event camera representation instead of a conventional
RGB input. We believe that this will translate into signif-
icant savings in latency, energy and memory when dealing
with longer untrimmed videos in practical use-cases.
We then measured the average FPS, sensing and process-
ing energy per frame on Jetson AGX and compared them
against STCAT in Table 3. We found that NeuroViG runs
3.82x faster, consumes 2.2x less sensing energy and 4.25x
less processing energy. Overall, this results in NeuroViG
being 4.08x energy efficient than STCAT, the current state-
of-the-art STVG approach. Figure 7 plots the latency of
STCAT vs. NeuroViG. We see that while the latency for
both models increases with the number of frames, However,
the rate of increase of latency for NeuroViG is significantly
lower than that of RGB-based STCAT.
In Table 3, we compared the performance of STVG us-
ing existing video processing techniques instead of our pro-
posed NeuroViG’s AFS paradigm. STCAT-SparseSampler
incorporates sparse sampling as proposed in ClipBERT
[11], where a random subset of frames is selected as an-
chor frames and applied to STCAT. STCAT-MGSampler,
on the other hand, adopts the motion-guided frame selection
method from MGSampler [29], which selects anchor frames
to cover key segments with high motion salience. However,
the results show that while these techniques achieve simi-
lar FPS and energy consumption to NeuroViG , they lead
to a substantial reduction in m vIoU. While ClipBERT’s
random sparse sampling may be effective for tasks such as
question answering, and MGSampler’s motion-based sam-
pling performs well in video action classification, these
methods are insufficient for STVG, which requires continu-
ous tracking of target object/region across frames.
5.4. Qualitative analysis: NeuroViG skipping
We further analyzed some of the instructions in the
dataset to understand how the AFS module picks the
anchor-frames. Our analysis revealed that it picks up anchor
frames whenever (a) there are static scenes in the video for
longer periods (event sensor not generating enough events),
(b) visual content partially matches the words in the text,
and (c) target object appears in a frame. Observation (a)
makes intuitive sense as event cameras inherently fail to
generate events when the scene is completely unchanged or
static; accordingly, AFS triggers the traditional RGB cam-
era in such scenarios.
Figure 8 shows two such example scenarios from the
VidSTG dataset. This figure shows a series of RGB and
event frames that are identified as anchor-frames, along
with the instruction. In both examples, it appears that the
AFS predicts an anchor-frame and subsequently triggers the
RGB camera when a keyword or the target object appears
in the scene. Furthermore, in the first example, anchor
frames are also flagged for static scenes, where the event
camera fails to generate sufficient discriminatory events for
the STVG pipeline.
5.5. Other variations of NeuroViG
We consider additional variations of NeuroViG to eval-
uate the efficacy of our hybrid sensing mechanism. Based
on Table 4, it is evident that the performance of NeuroViG
is significantly degraded when selecting anchor-frames at
random (NeuroViG-Random). This suggests that the careful
selection of anchor-frames is paramount to the performance
of NeuroViG system. With NeuroViG-Vision, we seek to
evaluate whether just using event visual feature on AFS is
enough to identify anchor-frames. Just using visual features
limits the capability of AFS to make an early decision about
when the target object appears and only allows it to per-
ceive changes in the scene. As shown in Table 4, while
the performance does not degrade as much as in NeuroViG-
Random, we observe a significant reduction in the accuracy
metrics. This demonstrates the importance of using both
language and visual features in AFS to predict the anchor-
frames in the video. Given the advantages of event cam-
eras, a plausible alternative approach might be to utilize
only the DVS-based event camera as input (Event-STCAT),
instead of NeuroViG’s hybrid sensing mechanism that uses
both event & RGB cameras. Such a system would reduce
5787
\nFigure 4. Accuracy
(m vIoU) vs. frame-skip
Figure 5. Sensing energy
per frame vs. frame-skip
 Figure 6. Processing en-
ergy/frame vs frame-skip
Figure 7. Latency vs num. frames for Neu-
roViG against STCAT
Table 1. Performance comparisons of the state-of-the-art on the VidSTG test set (%)
Methods Declarative Sentences Interrogative Sentences
m tIoU m vIoU vIoU@0.3 vIoU@0.5 % frames
skipped m tIoU m vIoU vIoU@0.3 vIoU@0.5 % frames
skipped
Two-Stage:
STGVT [19] 21.62 29.80 18.94 0 - - - - 0
One-Stage:
STVGBert [18] 23.97 30.91 18.39 0 22.51 25.97 15.95 0
TubeDETR [24] 48.10 30.40 42.50 28.20 0 46.90 25.70 35.70 23.20 0
STCAT [9] 50.82 33.14 46.20 32.58 0 49.67 28.22 39.24 26.63 0
NeuroViG(Ours) 49.01 32.15 44.89 31.06 66 48.89 27.12 38.09 25.43 64
Table 2. Performance on the HC-STVG test set (%)
Methods m tIoU m vIoU vIoU
@0.3
vIoU
@0.5
% frames
skipped
Two-Stage:
STVGT - 18.15 26.81 9.48 0
One-Stage:
STVGBert - 20.42 29.37 11.31 0
TubeDETR 43.70 32.40 49.80 23.50 0
STCAT 49.44 35.09 57.67 30.09 0
NeuroViG 48.65 34.01 56.12 28.91 65
Table 3. Accuracy vs FPS vs Energy trade-off for NeuroViG
against other baseline STVG systems
Model m vIoU FPS Energy per frame (J)
Sensing Processing Total
STCAT 30.54 2.2 0.22 4.59 4.81
STCAT-SparseSampler 12.19 8.8 0.22 1.04 1.26
STCAT-MGSampler 19.11 8.6 0.22 1.02 1.24
NeuroViG 30.11 8.4 0.10 1.08 1.18
Figure 8. Qualitative analysis of the functionality of AFS
the sensing overhead ∼ 4x. However, we observe a sim-
ilar significant degradation in accuracy ( m vIoU drop of
40+%) when using Event-STCAT. This suggests that, while
event cameras do provide a good energy-aware approxima-
tion to traditional RGB camera sensing, a combination of
event+RGB features is paramount for STVG.
Table 4. Ablation study of NeuroViG
Methods m tIoU m vIoU vIoU@0.3 vIoU@0.5
NeuroViG 48.62 29.40 41.67 28.07
NeuroViG-Random 31.12 16.15 20.21 14.76
NeuroViG-Vision 40.14 22.98 33.54 21.12
STCAT-Event 34.17 19.76 28.16 17.19
6. Conclusion
We present NeuroViG , a novel system combining an
event camera and an RGB camera for energy-efficient
spatio-temporal video grounding. Our Adaptive Frame Se-
lection (AFS) module identifies key anchor frames using
event streams and language cues, activating the RGB sen-
sor only when needed. The system’s dynamic pipeline
improves efficiency by selectively invoking a transformer-
based DNN for these frames. NeuroViG is the first to use a
neuromorphic event camera for STVG, achieving a 4x en-
ergy reduction and 3.8x faster processing with only 1% ac-
curacy loss.
7. Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by National Research
Foundation, Prime Minister’s Office, Singapore through
both its Campus for Research Excellence and Technolog-
ical Enterprise (CREATE) Program and NRF Investiga-
torship under Grant NRF-NRFI05-2019-0007, The Mens,
Manus, and Machina (M3S) is an interdisciplinary re-
search group of the Singapore-MIT Alliance for Research
and Technology centre, and in part by the Agency for
Science, Technology and Research, Singapore through
its AME Programmatic Funding Scheme under Grant
#A18A2b0046.
5788
\nReferences
[1] Azure kinect dk. https://azure.microsoft.com/
en- us/products/kinect- dk. Accessed: 2023-10-
10. 5
[2] Cheetah streaming speech-to-text. https :
/ / picovoice . ai / platform / cheetah/, . Ac-
cessed: 2022-04-11. 6
[3] Jetson agx xavier series. https : / / www . nvidia .
com/en- sg/autonomous- machines/embedded-
systems/jetson- agx- xavier/. Accessed: 2023-
10-10. 3, 6
[4] Prophesee evaluation kit 2 – hd. https : / / www .
prophesee.ai/event-based-evk-2/ . Accessed:
2023-10-10. 4, 5
[5] Iz Beltagy, Matthew E Peters, and Arman Cohan. Long-
former: The long-document transformer. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.05150, 2020. 4
[6] Yixin Chen, Qing Li, Deqian Kong, Yik Lun Kei, Song-Chun
Zhu, Tao Gao, Yixin Zhu, and Siyuan Huang. Yourefit: Em-
bodied reference understanding with language and gesture.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision, pages 1385–1395, 2021. 2
[7] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun.
Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 770–778, 2016. 3, 5
[8] Y Hu, S C Liu, and T Delbruck. v2e: From video frames
to realistic DVS events. In 2021 IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops
(CVPRW). IEEE, 2021. 6
[9] Yang Jin, Zehuan Yuan, Yadong Mu, et al. Embracing con-
sistency: A one-stage approach for spatio-temporal video
grounding. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, 35:29192–29204, 2022. 1, 2, 3, 6, 8
[10] Aishwarya Kamath, Mannat Singh, Yann LeCun, Gabriel
Synnaeve, Ishan Misra, and Nicolas Carion. Mdetr-
modulated detection for end-to-end multi-modal understand-
ing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Confer-
ence on Computer Vision, pages 1780–1790, 2021. 2
[11] Jie Lei, Linjie Li, Luowei Zhou, Zhe Gan, Tamara L Berg,
Mohit Bansal, and Jingjing Liu. Less is more: Clipbert for
video-and-language learning via sparse sampling. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, pages 7331–7341, 2021. 7
[12] Patrick Lichtsteiner, Christoph Posch, and Tobi Delbruck.
A 128 x 128 120db 30mw asynchronous vision sensor that
responds to relative intensity change. In 2006 IEEE Inter-
national Solid State Circuits Conference-Digest of Technical
Papers, pages 2060–2069. IEEE, 2006. 2
[13] Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar
Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettle-
moyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized
bert pretraining approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692,
2019. 3, 5
[14] Junhua Mao, Jonathan Huang, Alexander Toshev, Oana
Camburu, Alan L Yuille, and Kevin Murphy. Generation
and comprehension of unambiguous object descriptions. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pages 11–20, 2016. 2
[15] Henri Rebecq, Ren ´e Ranftl, Vladlen Koltun, and Davide
Scaramuzza. Events-to-video: Bringing modern computer
vision to event cameras. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,
pages 3857–3866, 2019. 3
[16] Anna Rohrbach, Marcus Rohrbach, Ronghang Hu, Trevor
Darrell, and Bernt Schiele. Grounding of textual phrases in
images by reconstruction. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2016:
14th European Conference, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
October 11–14, 2016, Proceedings, Part I 14 , pages 817–
834. Springer, 2016. 2
[17] Amos Sironi, Manuele Brambilla, Nicolas Bourdis, Xavier
Lagorce, and Ryad Benosman. Hats: Histograms of aver-
aged time surfaces for robust event-based object classifica-
tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pages 1731–1740, 2018. 3
[18] Rui Su, Qian Yu, and Dong Xu. Stvgbert: A visual-
linguistic transformer based framework for spatio-temporal
video grounding. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Inter-
national Conference on Computer Vision, pages 1533–1542,
2021. 2, 8
[19] Zongheng Tang, Yue Liao, Si Liu, Guanbin Li, Xiaojie Jin,
Hongxu Jiang, Qian Yu, and Dong Xu. Human-centric
spatio-temporal video grounding with visual transformers.
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Tech-
nology, 32(12):8238–8249, 2021. 2, 6, 8
[20] Amirhossein Tavanaei, Masoud Ghodrati, Saeed Reza Kher-
adpisheh, Timoth´ee Masquelier, and Anthony Maida. Deep
learning in spiking neural networks. Neural networks ,
111:47–63, 2019. 2
[21] Xin Wang, Fisher Yu, Zi-Yi Dou, Trevor Darrell, and
Joseph E Gonzalez. Skipnet: Learning dynamic routing in
convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , pages 409–424,
2018. 3
[22] Dulanga Weerakoon, Vigneshwaran Subbaraju, Tuan Tran,
and Archan Misra. Cosm2ic: Optimizing real-time multi-
modal instruction comprehension. IEEE Robotics and Au-
tomation Letters, 7(4):10697–10704, 2022. 2, 3
[23] Dulanga Weerakoon, Vigneshwaran Subbaraju, Tuan Tran,
and Archan Misra. Softskip: Empowering multi-modal dy-
namic pruning for single-stage referring comprehension. In
Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on
Multimedia, pages 3608–3616, 2022. 3
[24] Antoine Yang, Antoine Miech, Josef Sivic, Ivan Laptev, and
Cordelia Schmid. Tubedetr: Spatio-temporal video ground-
ing with transformers. InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
16442–16453, 2022. 1, 2, 3, 6, 8
[25] Zhengyuan Yang, Tianlang Chen, Liwei Wang, and Jiebo
Luo. Improving one-stage visual grounding by recursive sub-
query construction. In ECCV, 2020. 2
[26] Licheng Yu, Zhe Lin, Xiaohui Shen, Jimei Yang, Xin Lu,
Mohit Bansal, and Tamara L Berg. Mattnet: Modular atten-
tion network for referring expression comprehension. InPro-
5789
\nceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 1307–1315, 2018. 2
[27] Zhu Zhang, Zhou Zhao, Yang Zhao, Qi Wang, Huasheng
Liu, and Lianli Gao. Where does it exist: Spatio-temporal
video grounding for multi-form sentences. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition, pages 10668–10677, 2020. 2, 6
[28] Zhaohui Zheng, Ping Wang, Wei Liu, Jinze Li, Rongguang
Ye, and Dongwei Ren. Distance-iou loss: Faster and better
learning for bounding box regression. In Proceedings of the
AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 34, pages
12993–13000, 2020. 5
[29] Yuan Zhi, Zhan Tong, Limin Wang, and Gangshan Wu.
Mgsampler: An explainable sampling strategy for video ac-
tion recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Inter-
national conference on Computer Vision, pages 1513–1522,
2021. 7
[30] Yiyi Zhou, Rongrong Ji, Gen Luo, Xiaoshuai Sun, Jinsong
Su, Xinghao Ding, Chia-Wen Lin, and Qi Tian. A real-time
global inference network for one-stage referring expression
comprehension. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and
Learning Systems, 2021. 2
[31] Zhuyun Zhou, Zongwei Wu, R ´emi Boutteau, Fan Yang,
C´edric Demonceaux, and Dominique Ginhac. Rgb-event fu-
sion for moving object detection in autonomous driving. In
2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Au-
tomation (ICRA), pages 7808–7815. IEEE, 2023. 3
[32] Alex Zihao Zhu and Liangzhe Yuan. Ev-flownet: Self-
supervised optical flow estimation for event-based cameras.
In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2018. 3
5790
